Add docs for multi-cluster install (#157)
istio-ecosystem/sail-operator: docs/README.md

**Note:** The `IstioOperator` / `istioctl` example is separate from the Sail-operator. Setting `spec.components` or `spec.values.gateways` on your Sail-operator `Istio` resource **will not work**.

## Multicluster

> Currently, only the [multi-primary](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/multicluster/multi-primary) deployment model is supported with the Sail-operator. Primary-remote and external-controlplane support are in progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, only the [multi-primary](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/multicluster/multi-primary) deployment model is supported with the Sail-operator. Support for primary-remote and external-control-plane deployments is in progress.
```

    ```sh
    kubectl get ns istio-system --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" || kubectl create namespace istio-system --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}"
    ```

    ```sh
    kubectl get ns istio-system --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" || kubectl create namespace istio-system --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}"
    ```

3. Create shared trust and add intermediate CAs to each cluster.

    If you already have a [shared trust](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/multicluster/before-you-begin/#configure-trust) for each cluster you can skip this. Otherwise, you can use the instructions below to create a shared trust and push the intermediate CAs into your clusters.

    Create a self signed root and intermediate CAs.
    ```sh
    mkdir -p certs
    pushd certs
    make -f "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}/tools/certs/Makefile.selfsigned.mk" root-ca
    make -f "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}/tools/certs/Makefile.selfsigned.mk" east-cacerts
    make -f "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}/tools/certs/Makefile.selfsigned.mk" west-cacerts
    popd
    ```

    Push the intermediate CAs to each cluster.
    ```sh
    kubectl --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" label namespace istio-system topology.istio.io/network=network1

>     kubectl get secret --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" cacerts || kubectl create secret generic cacerts -n istio-system --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" \

Reviewer 2: I think the `get` is missing a `-n istio-system`

          --from-file=certs/east/ca-cert.pem \
          --from-file=certs/east/ca-key.pem \
          --from-file=certs/east/root-cert.pem \
          --from-file=certs/east/cert-chain.pem
    kubectl --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" label namespace istio-system topology.istio.io/network=network2

>     kubectl get secret --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" cacerts || kubectl create secret generic cacerts -n istio-system --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" \

Reviewer 2: I think the `get` is missing a `-n istio-system`

          --from-file=certs/west/ca-cert.pem \
          --from-file=certs/west/ca-key.pem \
          --from-file=certs/west/root-cert.pem \
          --from-file=certs/west/cert-chain.pem
    ```

4. Create Sail CR on east

    ```sh
    kubectl apply --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -f - <<EOF
    apiVersion: operator.istio.io/v1alpha1
    kind: Istio
    metadata:

>       name: default

Reviewer: Should we create this in the `istio-system` namespace as otherwise it will be created in `default` namespace.

Author: Namespace where the istiod gets put is set in `spec.namespace` rather than `.metadata.namespace` because `Istio` is a cluster scoped resource.

            clusterName: west
          network: network2
    EOF
    kubectl wait --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" --for=jsonpath='{.status.revisions.ready}'=1 istios/default --timeout=3m
    ```

8. Create east-west gateway on west

    ```sh
    "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/samples/multicluster/gen-eastwest-gateway.sh \
        --mesh mesh1 --cluster west --network network2 | \
        "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/bin/istioctl --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" install -y -f -
    ```

9. Expose services on west

    ```sh
    kubectl --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" apply -n istio-system -f \
        "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/samples/multicluster/expose-services.yaml
    ```

10. Install a remote secret in west that provides access to east’s API server.

    If using kind, first get the east controlplane ip and pass the `--server` option to `istioctl create-remote-secret`

    ```sh
    WEST_CONTAINER_IP=$(kubectl get nodes east-control-plane --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -o jsonpath='{.status.addresses[?(@.type == "InternalIP")].address}')
    "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/bin/istioctl create-remote-secret \
      --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" \
      --name=east \
      --server="https://${WEST_CONTAINER_IP}:6443" | \

>       kubectl apply -f - --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}"

Reviewer: It looks like this is similar to the alternate approach described in Lines 181-184 except that we are passing some additional arguments here. If there is no functional difference between the two, I would suggest that we can remove this and simply document the simpler one.

Author: Well this example will only work on kind if you pass the addtional `--server=...` argument. Maybe I can add a note below the example documenting the extra argument for kind instead of showing the same example twice?

Author: I switched the examples so that the simpler example shows up first.

    ```

    otherwise use

    ```sh
    "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/bin/istioctl create-remote-secret \
        --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" \
        --name=cluster1 | \
        kubectl apply -f - --context="${CTX_CLUSTER2}"
    ```

11. Install a remote secret in east that provides access to west’s API server.

    If using kind, first get the east controlplane ip and pass the `--server` option to `istioctl create-remote-secret`

    ```sh

>     EAST_CONTAINER_IP=$(kubectl get nodes west-control-plane --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" -o jsonpath='{.status.addresses[?(@.type == "InternalIP")].address}')

Reviewer: ditto

    "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/bin/istioctl create-remote-secret \
      --context="${CTX_CLUSTER2}" \
      --name=west \
      --server="https://${EAST_CONTAINER_IP}:6443" | \
      kubectl apply -f - --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}"
    ```

    otherwise use

    ```sh
    "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/bin/istioctl create-remote-secret \
        --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" \
        --name=cluster1 | \
        kubectl apply -f - --context="${CTX_CLUSTER2}"
    ```

12. Deploy sample applications and verify that you get a response from both v1 and v2 of the hellworld service.

    ```sh

>     kubectl get ns sample --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" || kubectl create --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" namespace sample

Reviewer: Can we split this step into two (i.e., east cluster and west cluster) as it would improve the readability.

    kubectl get ns sample --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" || kubectl create --context="${CTX_CLUSTER2}" namespace sample
    kubectl label --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" namespace sample istio-injection=enabled
    kubectl label --context="${CTX_CLUSTER2}" namespace sample istio-injection=enabled
    kubectl apply --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" \
        -f "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/samples/helloworld/helloworld.yaml \
        -l service=helloworld -n sample
    kubectl apply --context="${CTX_CLUSTER2}" \
        -f "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/samples/helloworld/helloworld.yaml \
        -l service=helloworld -n sample
    kubectl apply --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" \
        -f "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/samples/helloworld/helloworld.yaml \
        -l version=v1 -n sample
    kubectl apply --context="${CTX_CLUSTER2}" \
        -f "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/samples/helloworld/helloworld.yaml \
        -l version=v2 -n sample
    kubectl apply --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" \
        -f "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/samples/sleep/sleep.yaml -n sample
    kubectl apply --context="${CTX_CLUSTER2}" \
        -f "${ISTIOCTL_DIR}"/samples/sleep/sleep.yaml -n sample
    ```

> 13. Verify you see a response from both v1 and v2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
13. Verify that you see a response from both v1 and v2.
```

      --from-file=certs/west/ca-key.pem \
      --from-file=certs/west/root-cert.pem \
      --from-file=certs/west/cert-chain.pem
    ```

4. Create Sail CR on east

    ```sh
    kubectl apply --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -f - <<EOF
    apiVersion: operator.istio.io/v1alpha1
    kind: Istio
    metadata:
      name: default
    spec:
      version: v${ISTIO_VERSION}
      namespace: istio-system
      values:
        pilot:
          resources:
            requests:
              cpu: 100m
              memory: 1024Mi
        global:
          meshID: mesh1
          multiCluster:
            clusterName: east
          network: network1
    EOF
    kubectl wait --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" --for=jsonpath='{.status.revisions.ready}'=1 istios/default --timeout=3m
    ```

5. Create east-west gateway on east

    ```sh
    curl -fsL "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/${ISTIO_VERSION}/samples/multicluster/gen-eastwest-gateway.sh" | \
      bash -s -- --mesh mesh1 --cluster east --network network1 | \
      istioctl manifest generate -f - | \
      kubectl apply --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -f -
    ```

6. Expose services on east

    ```sh

>     kubectl --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" apply -n istio-system -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/${ISTIO_VERSION}/samples/multicluster/expose-services.yaml

Reviewer 2: maybe we can just include the istio `Gateway` resource here? it doesn't seem to change across releases

Author: I can include it here. The instructions here are mostly the same as the istio docs.

    ```
    The old `IstioRevision` resource and the old control plane will be deleted when the grace period specified in the `Istio` resource field `spec.updateStrategy.inactiveRevisionDeletionGracePeriodSeconds` expires.

> ## Multicluster

Reviewer: Should this be "Multi-cluster"?

Author: Either way is fine with me as long as we're consistent

You can follow the steps below to install manually or you can run [this script](multicluster/setup-multi-primary.sh) which will setup a local environment for you with kind. Before running the setup script, you must install [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation) and [cloud-provider-kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/loadbalancer/#installing-cloud-provider-kind) then ensure the `cloud-provider-kind` binary is running in the background.

These installation instructions are adapted from: https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/multicluster/multi-primary_multi-network/. 

1. Create an `Istio` resource on `cluster1`.

    ```sh
    kubectl apply --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -f - <<EOF
    apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1alpha1
    kind: Istio
    metadata:
      name: default
    spec:
      version: v${ISTIO_VERSION}
      namespace: istio-system
      values:
        pilot:
          resources:
            requests:
              cpu: 100m
              memory: 1024Mi
        global:
          meshID: mesh1
          multiCluster:
            clusterName: cluster1
          network: network1
    EOF

>     kubectl wait --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" --for=jsonpath='{.status.revisions.ready}'=1 istios/default --timeout=3m

Author: It works!

    ```

2. Create east-west gateway on `cluster1`.

    ```sh

>     kubectl apply --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -f ./multicluster/east-west-gateway-net1.yaml

Reviewer 3: Nevermind. I see that it's a new dir under `docs`. But maybe point out that folks need to check out this repo (or use a GitHub URL).

>     kubectl apply --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -f ./multicluster/east-west-gateway-net1.yaml

Author: Github URLs are better and we already use them in other parts of this guide.

>     kubectl apply --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -f ./multicluster/east-west-gateway-net1.yaml

Author: Since the URLs reference main, they will have the side effect of not working until these docs get merged.

    ```

4. Create `Istio` resource on `cluster2`.

    ```sh
    kubectl apply --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" -f - <<EOF
    apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1alpha1
    kind: Istio
    metadata:
      name: default
    spec:
      version: v${ISTIO_VERSION}
      namespace: istio-system
      values:
        pilot:
          resources:
            requests:
              cpu: 100m
              memory: 1024Mi
        global:
          meshID: mesh1
          multiCluster:
            clusterName: cluster2
          network: network2
    EOF
    kubectl wait --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" --for=jsonpath='{.status.revisions.ready}'=1 istios/default --timeout=3m
    ```

5. Create east-west gateway on `cluster2`.

    ```sh
    kubectl apply --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" -f ./multicluster/east-west-gateway-net2.yaml
    ```

6. Expose services on `cluster2`.

    ```sh
    kubectl --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" apply -n istio-system -f ./multicluster/expose-services.yaml
    ```

7. Install a remote secret in `cluster2` that provides access to the `cluster1` API server.

    ```sh
    istioctl create-remote-secret \
      --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" \

>       --name=east | \

Author: Thanks for catching these!

    ```

2. Create east-west gateway on `cluster1`.

    ```sh
    kubectl apply --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -f ./multicluster/east-west-gateway-net1.yaml
    ```
  
3. Expose istiod on `cluster1`.

    ```sh
    kubectl apply --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -f ./multicluster/expose-istiod.yaml
    ```

4. Expose services on `cluster1` and `cluster2`.

    ```sh
    kubectl --context "${CTX_CLUSTER1}" apply -n istio-system -f ./multicluster/expose-services.yaml
    ```

5. Create `RemoteIstio` resource on `cluster2`.

    ```sh
    kubectl apply --context "${CTX_CLUSTER2}" -f - <<EOF
    apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1alpha1
    kind: RemoteIstio
    metadata:
      name: default
    spec:
      version: v${ISTIO_VERSION}
      namespace: istio-system
      updateStrategy:
        type: InPlace
        inactiveRevisionDeletionGracePeriodSeconds: 30
      values:
        istiodRemote:
          injectionPath: /inject/cluster/remote/net/network2
        global:
          remotePilotAddress: $(kubectl --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -n istio-system get svc istio-eastwestgateway -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}')
    EOF
    ```

> 6. Set the controlplane cluster and network and for `cluster2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Set the controlplane cluster and network for `cluster2`.
```

    ```sh

>     kubectl --context="${CTX_CLUSTER2}" annotate namespace istio-system topology.istio.io/controlPlaneClusters=primary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    kubectl --context="${CTX_CLUSTER2}" annotate namespace istio-system topology.istio.io/controlPlaneClusters=cluster1
```
